If you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go together.
Fall seven times, stand up eight.
Shared joy is a double joy; shared sorrow is half a sorrow.
Words should be weighed, not counted.
If you can’t live longer, live deeper.
Do good and throw it in the sea.
It’s better to light a candle than curse the darkness.
A man who uses force is afraid of reasoning.
Still waters run deep.
He who does not travel, does not know the value of people.
The night rinses what the day has soaped.
Measure a thousand times and cut once.
A spoon does not know the taste of soup, nor a learned fool the taste of wisdom.
The most beautiful fig may contain a worm.
Change yourself and fortune will change.
Who begins too much accomplishes little.
Whoever gossips to you will gossip about you. 
Beauty lies in the eye of the beholder.
Don’t sail out farther than you can row back.
There is no shame in not knowing; the shame lies in not finding out.
Age is honorable and youth is noble.
In a battle between elephants, the ants get squashed.
If you take big paces, you leave big spaces.
Before you score, you first must have a goal.
Good advice is often annoying, bad advice never is.
What you see in yourself is what you see in the world.
It takes a whole village to raise a child.
Examine what is said, not who speaks.
A large chair does not make a king.
Deep doubts, deep wisdom; small doubts, small wisdom.
A man does not seek his luck; luck seeks its man.
A teacher is better than two books.
A beautiful thing is never perfect.
The reputation of a thousand years may be determined by the conduct of one hour.
Character is always corrupted by prosperity.
A fault confessed is half redressed.
To be willing is only half the task.
Everyone is kneaded out of the same dough, but not baked in the same oven.
The heart that loves is always young.
He who always thinks it is too soon is sure to come too late.
Turn your face to the sun and the shadows will fall behind you.
When the sun rises, it rises for everyone.
No one can paddle two canoes at the same time.
If you go to a donkey’s house, don’t talk about ears.
Speak the truth, but leave immediately after.
Examine what is said, not him who speaks.
When God wanted to doom the ant, he gave it wings.
To be willing is only half the task.
You don’t water a camel with a spoon.
Experience is the comb that nature gives us when we are bald.
Do not protect yourself by a fence, but rather by your friends.
When the student is ready, the master will appear.
God gives every bird its food, but does not always drop it into the nest.
Alles van waarde is weerloos - Everything of value is defenseless.
Where you find fault with something, come and give a hand.
He who conceals his disease cannot expect to be cured.
In der Not frisst der Teufel Fliegen - When he has to, the devil eats flies.
A single arrow is easily broken, but not ten in a bundle.
Fall seven times, stand up eight.
The rich man thinks of next year, the poor man of the present moment
A stranger nearby is better than a far-away relative.
If there is no wind, row.
Instruction in youth is like engraving in stone.
Don't think there are no crocodiles because the water is calm.
If you see no reason for giving thanks, the fault lies in yourself.
It's impossible to awaken someone who is pretending to be asleep.
One has responsibility, not power.
Talk to your children while they are eating; what you say will stay even after you are gone. 
He who is being carried does not realize how far the town is.
Not to know is bad; not to wish to know is worse.
Adversity makes a man wise, not rich.
If you wish good advice, consult an old man.
A priest's beard is always soaked in butter.
Tell me who's your friend and I'll tell you who you are.
You can get to the ends of the world on a lie, but you cannot return.
What may be done at any time will be done at no time.
With lies you may go ahead in the world, but you can never go back.
After all, to make a beautiful omelet you have to break an egg.
Don't speak unless you can improve on the silence.
A mucho decir, mucho mentir - To say much is to lie much.
Cría cuervos y te sacarán los ojos - Raise crows and they will gouge out your eyes.
Dios aprieta, pero no ahorca - God squeezes but does not strangle.
Entre broma y broma, la verdad se asoma - Between joke and joke, the truth appears.
Gallina vieja hace buen caldo - old hen makes good soup.
Más discurre un hambriento que cien letrados - A hungry man runs more than a hundred lawyers.
No hay miel sin hiel - No honey without gall.
Una vez al año no hace daño - Once a year does not hurt.
A quien buen arbol se arrima, buena sombra le acarrece - To whom a good tree huddles, a good shade brings him.
Don't throw away the old bucket until you know whether the new one holds water.
Go often to the house of a friend; for weeds soon choke up the unused path.
Shared joy is a double joy; shared sorrow is half a sorrow.
Measure a thousand times and cut once.
No matter how far you have gone on a wrong road, turn back.
Tatli dil yilani deliginden cikarir - Kind words take the snake out of his hole.
Adfyd a ddwg wybodaeth, a gwybodaeth doethineb - Adversity brings knowledge and knowledge, wisdom.
Everyone is kneaded out of the same dough, but not baked in the same oven.
God couldn't be everywhere, so he created mothers.
If all men pulled in one direction, the world would topple over.
If you sit in a hot bath, you think the whole town is warm. 